Okay, welcome to 6:31,
last session of the day.
My name is Matt Drance,
and I work in DTS, supporting Java,
among other things.
So I'm here to talk to you about the JNI.
What is the JNI?
I hope everybody here knows, but,
you know, in case you don't,
it's the Java Native Interface.
It's a mechanism that's
been around since Java 1.0,
and it lets you integrate pure
Java code with native code.
In the case of Mac OS X, that means C,
C++, Objective-C.
It's got a number of uses.
In the older days,
it was really heavily used
for incrementally porting a
native code base over to Java.
So you want to do it in steps,
keep some of your native code in place,
and just hook it into the Java code
that you've written so far.
It's useful still today for
leveraging some legacy or open-source
libraries that you might run
into if you have a pure Java app,
and you want to make use of something
that happens to not be written in Java.
It's also useful for the other
direction of the first point,
which is if you have
a Java code base that,
for whatever reason,
you might want to port to
Cocoa or Core Foundation or
some other native framework,
you can do that incrementally.
And it also allows you to provide some
platform-specific features that might be
absent from the Java 2 Standard Edition.
Java can't do everything, and, you know,
the JNI can come in to help
you bridge some of those gaps.
So what are we going to talk about today?
We're going to talk about building
a JNI application in Excel.
We have templates and samples that,
you know, already do this for you,
but they can kind of be a little
confusing and a little overwhelming,
so I thought we'd walk through that
and get used to some of the targets
in Xcode and things like that.
And then we'll talk about -- most of this
talk is going to be about Java native
graphical user interface integration,
mixing Java and native components.
We'll talk about Cocoa Component,
which is one of our extended
EAWT APIs that lets you go
ahead and embed an NSVP code.
We'll talk about the Java container.
We'll talk about the
AWT native interface,
sometimes called JWT for short.
And we'll also talk about the threading
implications that come into play
when you start to play these games.
All through the talk,
I'll talk about some of the simple
things that you need to keep in
mind when you're sharing data
between the Java and native side.
And we'll briefly touch on
invocation of a virtual machine
from C and Objective-C apps.
This is a loaded talk.
We have a lot to talk about.
I'm going to try to do it before 5:00.
So we're going to move kind of fast.
So let's start with building
JNI projects with Xcode.
Why Xcode?
Well, aside from the fact that
this is an Apple conference,
Xcode has a pretty cool advantage
in terms of JNI development in that
it's the only IDE that can give
you a single project that will go
ahead and build your Java code,
your native code, link everything,
bundle it all together into a
single double-clickable application
with a single project with
the click of one build button.
And we're going to show
you how to do that.
So what goes into creating
a JNI project in Xcode?
Well, obviously,
you have your Java application,
your double-clickable,
just like a normal Swing
or AWT app on Mac OS X.
You need to create a target to
generate some native headers
using some command-line JDK tools.
Then you need to actually create
your native implementation
using a native target in Xcode,
set up dependencies between
all of these different targets,
and we go ahead and copy these files
that are the products of these individual
targets into your final bundled app.
So let's get hands-on right away.
Can we go to demo two, please?
How many of you have downloaded
the supporting DMGs for the
sessions and had a look at the
projects that came with this talk?
Okay.
So those of you who have,
go ahead and feel free
to work along with me.
I had initially planned to really
do this from scratch and go from the
beginning and walk you through it,
but something happened on Monday that
requires I talk about some extra things.
So we're going to cut
this one a little short.
We're just I'm just going
to go ahead and open up
I'm in Xcode 2.1 here.
Those of you who are working
in 2.1 may have noticed a
couple things that changed,
and we'll get to that in a second.
So I'll just start by running this first.
And...
We're going to go ahead and create--
we're going to go ahead and build this.
And it's going to fail.
And that's because Xcode 2.1 changed
something in terms of building.
And so those of you who may have
tried to do this in Xcode 2.1,
this is a big difference.
Those of you who have
worked in Xcode in the past,
the build products have been
broken up into development and
deployment subdirectories now.
And we're doing a couple of
references into the build directory.
And so we're going to have to
change that along the line.
But let's just start from the beginning.
And I'll show you what this
project does basically.
So here's our JNI project.
And we get through the legalese.
And we basically want to go
check out the paint method.
So in the original,
this is basically a straight
modification of the standard Java swing
application template in Xcode.
Now, normally,
the paint method goes ahead
and paints something like
swing application or hello,
world.
I can't exactly remember.
Instead of that, we have this method
called get my full name,
and we declare this as a native
method that returns a string.
So this is the first step to hooking
into native services using the JNI.
So we declare our native method,
and now we're going to have
to-- in order to write a native
library to implement that method,
we're going to have to generate some
native headers based on these classes.
So normally,
I would go up into the project
menu and create a new target.
[Transcript missing]
So, the fruit of this shell script phase,
which is going to be a .h file,
I've added that to the
project just for reference.
And right now, at the time of,
at press time,
this was referencing something
from the build directory.
And we need to actually go ahead and
go into the development subdirectory.
So that's, if you were having problems
building this in Xcode 2.1,
that was the problem.
So go ahead and change that.
And now let's have a look at this
header file that got generated.
There we go.
So there's a lot of noise in here.
A lot of this stuff,
this is all generated by the Java H tool.
And now at the bottom,
Here is our function declaration
for the native method.
So you can see it's
called myFirstJNIProject,
which is the class name,
and then getMyFullName.
And it returns a J string,
which is a Java string.
And it takes in a JNIEnv pointer,
which is the pointer to the
Java environment above us.
And that's going to allow us to make
JNI function calls to do everything
we need to communicate back and forth.
And all of the JNI functions that
you create have either a J object or
a J class passed in as a parameter.
And that is the caller.
So this J object is a pointer
representing the Java object that
made the JNI call down into C.
In the case of a static method call,
this would be a J class
reference instead.
So we've got our header file,
so now we want to go ahead and
look at the native library.
And this is actually
very straightforward.
You can see I just copied and pasted
the signature from the header file.
And I'm not going to go
into the address book stuff,
but basically we go ahead and
we get -- we call AB get me,
which is the currently logged in user.
And we go ahead and we concatenate
those strings using core foundation,
and then we go ahead and we create a
Java string that can be returned back.
So this is the money right here.
We get our core foundation string,
we get the characters out of it,
and we create a Java string,
return that back up.
And now if I go back to the JNI project,
which is the top level thing,
I should go ahead and build and run.
Give it a couple seconds.
There it goes.
Okay.
Come on now.
So now instead of swing example,
it says WWDC 2005, which is...
which is the name of the
currently logged in user.
So obviously,
this is not incredibly sexy or special.
But it's a very simple example
of what you need to do to go down
into JNI and talk to a native API,
return information back up.
So I had mentioned that
something happened on Monday.
And I was as surprised
as you to hear about it,
believe it or not.
So we've got some additional
things that we need to talk about,
namely,
this whole universal binary thing.
So in order to create a universal binary,
which is something you will need
to do for your JNI libraries,
if you have a Java application
that is brought up,
Java obviously is going to be
native on either hardware platform.
So it's going to be your responsibility
as well to make sure the JNI libraries
that Java calls are native as well.
Because Java is not going
to come up in Rosetta.
And by the time the
application is launched,
by the time your
JNI libraries are loaded,
the option to load Rosetta
has already passed us by.
So you need to make sure that your
JNI libraries are going to be universal.
So in order to do that,
we're going to get the information
on the current project.
And right now,
there's a cross-development option here.
And as you can see down here,
there's a Mac OS X 10.4 universal option.
And it says,
are you sure you want to change?
Yes, I do want to change the directory.
So now,
we go over to our JNI lib target here.
I'm going to go over to the Build tab.
And there's an architectures item here,
and that needs to be set to Native Arc,
as you can see here.
And it really should be that simple.
So let's go ahead and build this and make
sure we indeed did do the right thing,
because I'm as new to
this as you guys are.
So now I want to go
to my build directory.
Let's go ahead and use the file utility.
Have a look at this JNI lib.
And no, I didn't do it correctly.
Help me out here guys, what am I missing?
Build succeeded.
Now let's just do it again.
Ah, now we have two files.
Now we have two lines here.
So first one is for Architecture PowerPC,
and the second one is for i386.
So it really is just a matter of checking
a few boxes in Xcode and rebuilding,
and you'll be ready for these
transitions that we were talking about.
So I think I've beaten this to death,
so let's go back to the slides.
Okay, so running through real
quick what we just did.
Create a Java application target just
like you normally would in Xcode.
Now, there's a number of ways to do this.
Some of our examples do
it a little differently.
Our templates in Xcode do
This is an alternate way to do
it using all native targets,
which is going to be important if you're
going to build a universal binary.
If you have older legacy targets that
were made with earlier templates,
you're going to need to upgrade
those to native targets,
and then that will allow you
to build a universal binary.
We create our native header target,
which is really just a shell
script phase that calls Java H to
get the signatures we need.
Then we create the native library using
the header that was just generated.
We copy and paste that stuff,
implement the function.
And the other thing that you see here,
this is in the build
settings of the JNI library.
I skipped over this.
The product name,
which is going to be the
central part of the file name,
needs to be the same as your
call to system load library.
System.load library is what you
do in the static initializer to
go ahead and load the JNI library.
So the name that you see here in
product name needs to match the string
that you pass to system.load library.
And then you wrap the file in a
lib prefix and a JNI lib suffix.
So in this case, the file name would
be lib JNI lib.jnilib.
And target dependencies.
In the case of the
project that we had there,
the native target obviously
had to depend on the headers.
We needed the headers to get
generated in order to use them.
And the application target,
which is going to be the
final double-clickable bundle,
also depends on the native library.
And then that's going to allow us
to build the entire thing in one
piece once the JNI lib is done.
Finally,
we need a copy files build phase,
which is going to
Move the JNI library
right into the bundle.
And actually, can we go back to the --
to Demo 2 for a second,
please?
I just want to show you
these dependencies in person.
So the first thing we're doing
is creating the Java headers,
doing the build script
with the Java headers.
And here is the information
for our JNI library.
And you'll see here there's a
dependency to the Java headers target.
And I'll just remove this real quick
and show you what it means to add one.
You basically just
click this plus button,
click Add Target.
And what this does is it basically
just runs through the list.
And whichever target you've got
selected up here is the active one.
It goes and runs through
the dependencies.
And it says,
if I try to build my first JNI project--
and let's have a look at that one.
This is the main one.
This depends on the library.
So when we try to build
my first JNI project,
it's going to say,
has the JNI lib been built?
No.
Then we go ahead and build
the JNI library first.
It's going to go to the
JNI library and say,
has the headers target been filled?
No.
Then we go ahead and build
the headers target first.
So just make sure that
everything is in the right place.
And then at the very end,
we have that copy files build phase.
And we're going to move it
into the Java resources,
which
Resources, Java.
Contents, Resources,
Java inside the application bundle.
And luckily,
all you have to do is select the
Java Resources dropdown and just
drag your JNI lib here from the
products over into copy files.
And that will do that for
you right before -- right at
the end of the build phase.
Okay.
Back to slides, please.
So one of the things we did in the
previous example was we went and
we got a string from address book,
which was a CoreFoundation string,
and we returned it to Java.
If those of you who may be
familiar with Live Connect or,
you know, the web scripting
protocol in Objective-C,
unfortunately, it's not quite that easy.
You do have to do a little work to
pass your strings back and forth.
Thank you for doing that.
It's a lot better.
[Transcript missing]
Okay,
so now let's talk about the really cool
stuff that I can't wait to show you guys,
which is the Java GUI integration.
And first we're going to
talk about Coho Component.
And Coho Component is something
that's been around since
our first JDK 1.4 release.
It's a pure Java class, sort of.
You extend com.apple, E-A-W-T,
Coho Component.
It's an Apple API.
You basically extend this class,
and this is going to allow you to embed
any Coho NS view that's available to you
on Mac OS X inside a Java AWT container.
You have to write your native
implementation underneath,
but this basically allows you to drop
it right into the component hierarchy.
You can transmit events right through,
or you can stop them using
standard Java event listeners,
and it's a really lightweight way of
integrating Java and native components.
So there are two key things to actually,
doing a Coho Component
extension or implementation.
You need to implement first
the create NS view long method,
which is, this is going to be your hook
between the Java and native world.
This is where you're going to go ahead,
it's basically going to be
declared as a native method,
and you're going to create whatever
NS view you're hoping to embed.
And when you get that pointer,
that NS view star,
you return that up as a 64-bit Java long,
or a J long in the JNI world.
There's also a 32-bit method
called create NS view,
which returns a J long.
So if you're using a
J int instead of a J long,
we've deprecated that as of Tiger,
because the Sun recommendation
has always been,
no matter what kind of
system you're actually on,
the recommendation has always been to
treat your native pointers as J longs.
And if you need to,
if you're on a 32-bit system,
you can safely get that
long and cast it to an int,
and the correct bits will
be chopped off and saved,
and you will have a legitimate pointer.
The other one is send message.
And this is basically a configuration
that you can use to send messages.
So if you're using a convenience API,
it lets you send really lightweight,
asynchronous requests to the native side,
rather than polluting all of your source
code with a bunch of native methods.
This is a mechanism
that's already in place,
and all you have to do is just
send different message identifiers
down and just have a single native
method implementation that maybe
switches on that identifier,
and then it tells--and then that will
tell you which task you need to use.
It's an easy way to do
non-blocking requests.
The key word is non-blocking.
And I'm gonna show you how to do that.
So let's see what's cool
about that in a little bit.
So our first demo here is going
to be something called the
Quartz Composer Cocoa component,
QC Cocoa component.
It uses the Quartz Composer QC view,
which is a new feature in Tiger.
And this is basically gonna
let us display Quartz Composer
compositions in a J frame.
You already saw that--those of
you who went to the Java overview,
you saw Scott demo this.
We're gonna show you
how it actually works.
So we're gonna go to Java class,
implement the native side,
and just move along
as you normally would.
So can we go to demo two, please?
Okay.
How many of you were at the
overview and saw this demo?
About half of you.
Okay.
So let's --
For those who didn't see it,
I will go ahead and demo
the built product first.
So up comes our project.
And by the way, for those of you who are
actually are going around --
going -- working along with me,
that problem I mentioned
about the development -- the
development build and -- I'm sorry,
the development directory for the header,
that's going to happen in every project.
So we're going to have to go
ahead and do that every time.
So let me just start with the Java file.
And like I said in the slides,
the key things here are
the CreateNSVLong method,
which is going to go down across
the JNI and create our pointer,
return it back as a Java long,
and here's our CreateNSV,
which just calls CreateNSVLong,
cast it to an int.
And we've declared a few constants here,
and these are going to be
used for the Send Message API,
which I had mentioned earlier.
And this is just going to be a
real easy way to go ahead and
tell the underlying NSView,
do something.
And then the NSView is going to go ahead
and switch based on these constants,
rather than have two JNI methods,
two native methods I had to declare,
more things in the header file,
more implementations to copy and paste
from the header file to the C file.
And notice that the sendMessage
method actually isn't defined here.
That's because it's
part of Cocoa component.
All the implementation stuff
that does that message send,
that message, that request transmission,
it's already done for you.
So you just need to call sendMessage.
So just like previously,
we have our Java headers target,
and I think...
There's another problem here,
which is that a lot of these shell script
variables changed between 2.0 and 2.1.
So, those of you who are
working along with me,
we need to go into the
Java headers target.
So, now we should be able to successfully
build the Java headers target.
Now we can retask.
Now that the header file
has actually been generated,
we can go ahead and
assign it to our project,
and we'll be able to build
everything else after that.
But let's have a look at the
header file for starters.
It's a lot of the same noise that
you saw in the address book example,
but there's a couple things
here that are interesting.
You see these pound defines here
regarding Java QC view load message.
So it actually not only did
it get the native methods,
but it went ahead and got
the static constants that
I declared in the Java file and
defined those on the C side.
This is actually pretty useful.
You know,
it's a stylistic difference whether
people actually go ahead and
import the generated header file or
because they don't like this noise,
maybe they just copy and paste these
function declarations into a header
file of their own that's more readable.
But if you're going to
use send message heavily,
I would really recommend just importing
this header directly because now you
have these defines in place for you.
The alternative would be to
go ahead and define an enum
in your own implementation,
and then you'd have to make sure
you updated it every time you
changed something on the Java side.
If you just use this header directly,
all of these defines are
going to be updated for you.
And as you can see,
let's go over to the implementation here.
This is the .m file.
This is where we actually create our...
NSView.
And here's our create
NSV long implementation.
And it's just going to do a -- this is,
you know, standard Cocoa stuff, allocate,
initialize, auto release an object,
and we're going to cast the pointer
to a Java -- 64-bit Java long,
and that's going to go ahead
and be used by the underlying
AWT to go ahead and embed this
guy into the component hierarchy.
And here is our
AWT message implementation.
This is the native side of the
Java send message function that's made
available to you by Cocoa component.
And you can see we're switching
the message ID and we're using the
pound defines from the header file.
So these match the constants that
we declared in the Java source.
So in the case of a load message,
we're going to go ahead and
get a composition based on
the string that was passed.
So here's our Java to native string
conversion that we did in the slides.
Get the characters out
of the string argument.
Create a new NSString.
And load composition from file is
actually just a method in QC view.
It's not something we declared.
It's just part of the standard
ports compositor view.
And then we release the string
characters when we're done,
of course.
And then the second message would
be to actually start the animation.
StartRendering is another
QC view method that we just call.
I probably could just have
done this all in one message,
but I wanted to demonstrate the
difference or what it would look
like to have multiple messages sent
through the AWT message method.
So let's go ahead and build this thing.
So it has to do a couple things.
It has to compile the Java files,
it has to create the header file,
and then it has to go ahead
and build the native targets.
So let's see what's missing here.
I'm guessing that the
header target was not found.
We're missing our source
files for some reason.
I wonder where those could have gone.
Okay, well, when in doubt,
just build it a second time.
Okay, so now here's our Java frame,
and these are standard Java JButtons,
and this black thing that you see here,
that is our QC view inside the
content pane of the JFrame.
And I click this Load button.
It's an ActionPerform
standard action listener,
and the ActionPerform method is going
to go ahead and call sendMessage,
which you can see right over here.
We're calling LoadComposition.
"Which is then going to
be a call to send message.
And then play is likewise
going to do the same thing.
The action listener on this
button goes ahead and does a send
message using that start message."
And there we have a Quartz Composer
composition playing inside Java.
It's not as exciting as Scott's demo.
He kind of one-upped me on it.
But I wanted this to be a very
simple demonstration of how
you can use Cocoa component to
just throw something in to a
Java application with minimal effort.
And there we have a Quartz Composer
composition playing inside Java.
It's not as exciting as Scott's demo.
He kind of one-upped me on it.
But I wanted this to be a very
simple demonstration of how
you can use Cocoa component to
just throw something in to a
Java application with minimal effort.
the exception of Jstring and
Jclass which respectively
represent string and class objects.
So you're going to get Jobjects
pretty much across the board
no matter what you pass down.
And if you need to hold on to these
Java objects in the native side,
your C function might return some value
or just finish what it's doing and then
maybe you have some callbacks that you're
going to receive on the C side that you
then want to propagate back up to Java.
How do you do that?
You need to hold on to that Java object.
And when you do that by creating
what's called a global reference.
And we have these JNI functions
called new global ref.
There's also new weak global ref
which is basically a weak reference
if you know what those are in Java.
The important thing to notice -- to know
when you start working with global refs
is that they affect garbage collection.
These are legitimate Java references
on the Java side and the virtual
machine does keep track of them.
So you need to use them
sparingly and responsibly.
When you're done using a global
you need to actually delete it.
If you don't, your Java object will
not be garbage collected.
So, again,
all you need to do to create a memory
leak in Java is write some C code.
And the easiest way to do this
in the case of native peers,
which is what we're doing with
this Cocoa component class,
is just implement the removeNotify
method on the Java side,
which is a method that gets
called when a component gets
removed from the hierarchy.
And in your remove notify method,
if you need to do anything,
you usually don't need to do
anything in the Java side.
But you go ahead and call a
Call down into the native code via JNI,
and that is an opportunity for
you to delete any global refs that
you may have been holding onto,
because presumably this thing's
been removed from the hierarchy.
It's probably not needed anymore,
and it's probably bound due
to be garbage collected.
So now we're going to talk
about calling Java methods
from C or Objective-C or C++.
A lot of people have
a hard time with this.
The documentation is hard to find,
and it's even harder to read.
There are some special codes for,
you know,
for Java method signatures and the
equivalents in C when you go ahead and
look up a method in JNI and that you
want to call across the JNI bridge.
So, you know,
you can use the Java P command line
tool and pass it the dash S flag,
and this will give you JNI-friendly
signatures for all your Java methods.
So if you need to make
a callback into Java,
use Java P to go ahead and get the method
that you -- the signature that you need,
and then you can call back into Java.
So, you know, we're going to talk about
calling Java methods from
C or Objective-C or C++.
So, you know, we're going to talk about
calling Java methods from
C or Objective-C or C++.
and then grab that and then
in your C code when you want
to create your callback,
use this string that
you get out of Java P.
And you always obtain the
method from the class.
Even if it's an object method,
you obtain the method definition
from the class and then
invoke it on the object later.
You can call find class with
an explicit class string or if
you have access to a J object,
you can call get object class
and passing in the object.
And so right here you see an example
of calling get method ID and class
is presumably a class that we got
using one of those two functions.
And so you can see the example here
of the signature at the end there.
So in this case,
it's a method with no parameters.
So you have the open and closed parens
there and the capital V means void.
So that's the return value.
So you would put the parameter values
inside those open and closed parens and
then the return value comes at the end.
And there's also an equivalent
get static method ID if you
need to call static methods.
So that brings us to an even
better Cocoa component demo,
one that we did not show
you in the overview.
Can we go back to demo two, please?
Okay.
So we can start in a bunch
of different places here.
Has anybody actually
played with these demos?
Has anybody seen the CW Cocoa component?
No?
Okay, good.
Well, we'll have a surprise then.
Okay.
So first I'm going to
bring up this Java example.
This is a pure
Java application with a JLabel,
and I'm going to click
this Colors button,
and it's going to show me
the J2SE color chooser.
And I'm going to
[Transcript missing]
What I'd like to do,
and assuming this guy's running,
I'll give you a little taste.
So,
we're going to start off with a little
bit of a demo of what this looks like.
And we're going to embed this
thing as a Cocoa component.
We're going to extend Cocoa component
just like in the previous demo,
and embed it right into the hierarchy.
So now instead of this colors button,
you see this color well.
So that is an NSColorWell native
view that we're creating in
Objective-C and embedding using
the Cocoa component mechanism.
And I click on this guy and the
native color picker has shown up.
And this is not,
I didn't have to do any code to do this.
This is standard NSColorWell behavior.
The difference is that
it's inside a J frame.
Now we're just sitting around
an Objective-C world and,
you know, if I select these colors,
Cocoa knows about them,
but we need a way to go ahead and tell
Java that a color selection has changed.
You know,
this work is not done for us like
it is with the J color chooser.
So.
In order to do that,
we're going to need to call
back up into Java from C.
And as you can see, it's working.
I select brown, I select magenta, green,
got my crayons.
So to be clear,
the color well change in color,
that's standard Cocoa behavior,
but this J label is actually
being changed because we're
creating a callback every time
the color well receives something.
So let's show you how that works.
So here's our, let's see,
I want the Java color well.
For those of you who
have the project open,
feel free to follow along.
The Java color well
has a Create NSV Long,
just like the Quartz Composer.
It's got a casted Create NSV,
that's nothing new.
And we've also got some
generic listener support,
you know, just like any other
AWT kind of component.
So we have an array of listeners,
and I've created these color
selection listener and color
selection event classes.
And this is going to be the framework
that's going to allow us to actually
communicate this stuff back to Java.
We could do it real
lightweight with callbacks,
but I want it to be a good Java citizen
and create an event structure for this.
So the key to all of this is
this Cocoa color change method.
And, you know, I've been working
This method,
you notice I listed it as private.
This method is what's going to be
called back from Cocoa when a color
change occurs in the NSColorWell.
And so at this point,
there's been a color
change in the NSColorWell,
and we want to go ahead
and notify Java of it.
So this is, I mean, if you've looked at
any of the JDK sources,
this is very standard stuff.
We go ahead and we loop
through all the selection,
through all the listeners,
we create an event,
and in this case we're past the
RGB and alpha values that came in
from the new color on the Cocoa side.
And then we go ahead and slap those
onto the event queue asynchronously,
which is a key point that I'll
be talking about a little later.
And I listed this as private
basically because I don't want
Java code accidentally calling this.
The only purpose of this is really just
to get a callback from the native code.
So now we can go check
out our header file.
And this doesn't look much different.
You notice we have a
bunch of constants here.
Close panel, deactivate,
and here's our remove notify.
And I mentioned that in the slides,
and I'll show you how
that actually works.
And we've got a couple
JNI functions here.
There's this one called init method IDs.
Actually, I skipped over that.
I'm going to go back to the
Java class for a second.
Here's our static initializer
where we load the library,
just like in all the other examples.
And then we do another call here
to initialize the method IDs.
And this is just, you know,
at class load time,
we go ahead and we look up the callbacks
that we know we're going to need later.
And the reason we do this is
because the Java method IDs live
as long as the class does.
So there's no need to reflectively
look up these callbacks
every time an event is fired.
Because as you can imagine,
that's going to really bog
things down real quickly.
So we just initialize the callbacks that
we know we need at the very beginning.
So here, in this case, it's just one.
It's that color change method
that we declared up in Java.
And this is how we look it up.
Because it's a static native method,
we get the class as the caller,
so we don't need to look it up,
and we go ahead and we request an ID.
We request a hook to the
CocoaColorChange method,
and here's the signature.
Four floats and return a void.
In this case,
it was actually a very similar,
I'm sorry, a very simple example.
Let me show you how I did that.
I was talking about the Java H.
The Java H utility a second ago,
I'm sorry, the Java P utility.
So I'm going to do Java P-S.
And let's point to this java
headers.jar and Apple VTS sample code.
CW Cocoa component.
And I'm just basically, you know,
doing the fully qualified class
name of the Java color well class.
and I am blocked.
I must have some kind of
permissions error here.
Let me try to fix that.
So what the Java P utility
should normally do is give
you a list of all the methods,
all the Java methods,
but the "-s" flag is going to go
ahead and give you this little piece,
which is going to be the native
signature that's used by JNI.
And I basically cut and pasted
this from the Java P output.
So now let's go take a look
a little further down and see
what we're actually doing here.
Here's our general initializer,
our createNSViewLong method.
which is just going to
initialize a new color well.
And you notice instead of
just creating it normally,
we're actually going to pass in
the object that called this method,
in which case it's the
Java object sitting on top of us,
the Java peer, if you will.
And we're actually going to save
this by creating a global reference,
and we need to do that because
we're going to make a call back
at some point in the future.
And we don't know when that is.
This function inevitably has to return.
Later on down the line,
we need to inform people that
this color change occurred.
And we're going to do that by
holding onto a global reference.
So that's going to be relevant later.
After that, we go ahead and, you know,
I had mentioned that you
need to maintain your global
references when you create them.
And so I use removeNotify because
it's not really a special thing.
We don't need to go ahead and do any
kind of parameter passing or anything.
We've declared removeNotify
as a native -- well,
we haven't declared
it as a native method.
We've overridden it from
the standard component.
And we're just going to call super,
but before we do that,
we're going to do a send message,
which is that standard Cocoa component
message transmission API.
And at that point,
we just go on faith from receiving
the message that we're done,
we don't need this anymore,
and we go ahead and delete
the global reference.
And this will allow the Java object
to be garbage collected later on.
So where's the real exciting
and interesting stuff?
Well,
This is the standard activate
method from the NSColorWell class.
And we're just going to
bring up an NSColor panel.
pass it right along.
The only thing we're doing here
is showing the opacity slider.
It's obviously not necessary,
it's just something
I thought would be cool.
And then the passing up activate to
super inevitably shows the color well,
I'm sorry, the color picker and ties
it to the active color well.
And the other thing we did is we
just overrode the set color method.
So that's every time
I change something here,
obviously set color is being
called on the NS color well.
And that's our opportunity to go
ahead and call back to Java and say,
hey, the color just changed.
Why don't you go ahead
and change that J label?
And here's our panel color change method.
First thing we need to do is get
a valid JNI environment pointer.
We do that by using this utility
function called attach current thread.
JNI environment pointers are
only valid for the current
thread that you're operating in.
because there's also a Java VM pointer.
I'm going to scroll up here.
And the Java VM here
we've declared a static,
and we basically just
cache it using onLoad.
The Java virtual machine is always,
you know, a-- basically a singular--
a singleton instance.
You can only have one JVM per process.
And you guys probably know this already.
So you can cache the VM,
but the Java environment is
tied to a specific thread.
So we need to create a fresh
one using attach current thread.
And then we go ahead and we get the
color from the standard Cocoa callback,
and we're converting this into
something that basically we know is
going to be safe for Java to use,
a generic RGB color.
And then we go ahead and
create four floats out of this,
red, green, blue, and alpha,
and then we call our color change method.
So here's the method ID we
cast when we loaded the class,
and here's the peer that we
saved using global ref when we
created the ColorWell instance.
And then we go ahead and we pass along.
This is obviously a Verargs declaration.
We pass the red, the green, the blue,
and the alpha.
So let's go back to the ColorWell,
and I'll show you what we're doing.
So here's the method.
It's expecting four floats,
and this is what happens when
we make that callback and we do
an invoke from the native side.
This method's going to be called,
and that's going to let us
go ahead and change things.
So right now, this is just generic.
In the actual test case,
I have a color selection listener.
which
So, I click on this,
and we get a call to set
color in the NSColorWell,
and we go ahead and we pull up
the object and the method ID,
call back to Java, Java goes and fires up
all of its listeners.
So, you think this is a lot of work,
and you may be worried about performance,
but actually it responds
pretty darn well.
As you can see, every time,
every single one of these little
color changes is a Cocoa call,
and then a callback across
the JNI over to Java,
across that bridge,
and then we're creating AWT events
and putting them asynchronously
onto the AWT event queue,
and they're being processed pretty well,
perfectly in time.
The opacity works fine, too.
So that...
I know a lot of people have been kind of
grieving over the standard JColorChooser,
so I'm hoping people will
get some use out of this.
And obviously with the
code that you have here,
which is part of the DMG,
it's not going to be much harder
to modify this sample to use,
for example, the font panel,
which is another thorn,
tends to be another thorn in people's
sides when working with pure Java.
So I think we're ready to
move back to the slides.
So, now that we're really getting
into back and forth talking,
you need to keep in mind, you know,
once you go down this road,
you are a Cocoa programmer,
and you need to be mindful
of what that means.
So, we have the Cocoa AppKit,
which is the event system in Cocoa,
and we also have the Java AWT.
Now, these two,
the AWT is built on top of Cocoa,
as you know, but they really are
separate environments,
and they can coexist.
But you need to help them,
and you need to, well,
not specifically help them,
you need to not stop
them from coexisting.
We have two separate event queues,
and they're operating
on two separate threads.
And you may have noticed that in
the example that I just showed you,
we were doing our Java callbacks using
an event queue that invoke later call.
And this gets us on the correct thread,
and it also does so asynchronously,
and it allows us to not block one
of these threads against the other.
So the key is when you're communicating
from one environment to another,
if you have an action performed
and then you go ahead and need
to do some AppKit drawing or
some kind of event transmission,
you need to do that asynchronously.
And in this case,
if you need some kind of return value,
you should really set up callbacks,
much like I did in the previous
example with event transmission.
And now it is time for the only diagram
you're going to see in this entire talk.
You go home, you ask your manager,
your manager asks you how
technical the session was.
You can tell them there was
only one picture the whole time.
So we have here the AppKit that
you can see up here running on top,
and the AWT event queue below.
So this MyAppKit notification,
let's say your JNI code has registered
for a notification from AppKit,
and those notifications always
occur on the main AppKit thread.
And the AWT is actually busy
processing a resize from either
the user moving the resize box,
or maybe something on the AWT thread
explicitly called set size.
So the app,
our AWT implementation is going to go
ahead and make a call to set frame,
which is the
Cocoa equivalent of set size.
And it's going to wait to get into the,
into the AppKit queue to do that.
So assuming your,
let's say your notification
is currently being processed,
and you make a Java call
back because you want to,
you want to tell the Java world that
this notification has occurred and
update something in your AWT GUI.
You make a call to event
queue dot invoke and wait,
which is halfway there.
You've at least properly gotten
yourself onto the AWT thread.
And your AWT callback properly
gets into the AWT event queue.
The problem is,
because you used invoke and wait,
you are blocking.
And none of this is going to return until
your do-AWT-work callback has returned.
Unfortunately, it can't do that,
because it's still waiting for the
resize implementation to be finished.
That can't do it,
because you have blocked
up the AppKit loop with
your notification handler.
And the result here is our famous friend,
the spinning beach ball.
So what can you do about this?
Well,
when you're calling the AWT from AppKit,
we really strongly recommend you
use the event queue.invoke later.
And the difference here
is that it will not block.
It will put you on the thread,
on the AWT thread,
just like invoke and wait does,
but it will not wait.
It will simply post what it needs to,
the runnable that you pass,
onto the AWT thread to be executed,
and then returns.
And it allows you to get out of the way.
[Transcript missing]
So let's see the difference.
So here's the same setup as before,
but now instead,
our notification handler is going
to actually call Invoke Later.
And you can see the dotted
line we've done differently,
meaning that it's non-blocking.
So we get our callback on the queue,
and then Invoke Later is
able to return immediately.
Nothing has really changed.
You're still going to
get your callback done,
but this is going to allow your
notification to get out of the way.
So that resize can get processed.
The set size call can
get off the AWT queue,
and then your AWT callback
can finally get done.
And this is a happy JNI application.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so I'm going to open up this
fourth demo with the incredibly
revealing title of JSheets.
So here is a pure Java application,
and you may be used
to the J file chooser.
Best friend to some, not to others.
And so this is a very simple demo.
It's just going to let me choose a file.
I'm going to open the J file chooser,
and now I'm going to show
a J option pane saying,
here's the file you selected.
So, a lot of people don't
like the J file chooser,
they'd like to do more,
they don't think the AWT file
dialogue is a viable solution.
So, maybe, just maybe,
we could do something different,
like say,
So, this is a standard Cocoa NSOpenPanel
that we have attached to a JFrame.
And let me go ahead and
show you what we have done.
Select another file.
Now I'm going to click Open here.
And then the Cocoa panel goes away
and our J option pane shows up.
So this was a Cocoa component
that came down.
We got a call back from it
receiving the file name.
And then we went ahead
and posted it to AWT.
We passed the string across the JNI.
And then AWT was able to react
to it by showing up a dialog.
So how do we do all of this?
Let's open up the Xcode project.
And we have this JSheet delegate class,
and we've got a bunch of, uh,
The real star here is the
native show sheet method.
And we're passing an integer
for the type open save.
We pass the component that
we want to be the parent,
and this is going to be where
we start using our JWT code.
And we're also going
to pass in a listener,
which is basically going
to be our callback handler
for when the sheet closes.
The thing about JWT is that the
sheets in Cocoa don't behave like file
choosers or file dialogs do in Java.
When you create a J file
chooser or a file dialog in AWT,
you basically assign an int value,
you basically wait for it
to return an int value.
Let me,
I've got my J file chooser code in here,
and let's have a look at it.
So right,
so here's your pure Java code that
calls JFileChooserShowSaveDialog.
This is going to show the save dialog,
it's going to block,
and then when the user dismisses
it or clicks cancel or OK,
we get an integer result value.
This is the pure Java example.
Well, because of that big
diagram I just showed you,
this may be a problem,
blocking against Java,
waiting for AppKit to
return something to us.
Luckily, Cocoa makes it easy for us,
or depending on how you want to say it,
forces it down our throat,
because the sheet model with
NSOpenPanel does not block like
that and return a value anyway.
Even if you're just doing pure Cocoa,
you have to specify a callback that is
then called when the sheet is dismissed.
So that part is taken care of for us,
and I'll show you in a second.
But here's our method, showSheet.
And we have wrappers for it,
show open sheet, show save sheet,
and we've tied those to the action
listeners on our JMenu items.
So let's go over to
the Objective-C world.
And here's our sheet
delegate implementation.
Let's start moving down.
And now you can see the value of
the init method ID's function.
The earlier example with the color well,
we only had one callback.
Now it's starting to get a little hairy,
and there's a bunch of different
things that we may need to do in
case it was the beginning of --
in case it was the end of a save,
in case it was the end of an open,
if it was a cancel.
So now we can do all
these things in one place,
and then just know later
-- and know later on with
confidence that we have them.
So here's our native show
sheet implementation.
And we're going to --
This is where the JWT comes in.
This getWindowFromComponent is a function
that I have created right further down.
And now you get into standard JWT code.
A lot of this may look very
familiar to those of you who
have seen the JWT example.
It's almost identical.
These JWT drawing surface
and drawing surface info,
these are standard structures that are
part of the Sun AWT Native Interface API.
And then there's this Mac OS X drawing
surface info that's part
of our own implementation.
And you can see that.
: So, we have a JVM header file here.
Here we've implemented the
JWT machine-dependent header.
Okay, so going back, we get the AWT,
we get the drawing surface
from the parent component,
in this case,
the component that we passed into
the native show sheet method.
We get the drawing surface info,
and we go ahead and we get
the platform-specific struct.
From there, our implementation provides
you with an NSView,
and this is the NSView corresponding
to the component that you
passed in to the request.
So once we get that,
we can just call viewWindow.
This is a standard Cocoa call,
and that's going to give us the
NSWindow pointer that we need.
Now, granted,
I'll admit that this may not be what the
founding fathers had in mind for JWT.
You know, like I said earlier,
this is really supposed to
be a native drawing thing,
but everything we're doing
here is completely legitimate,
and as you saw earlier with
the example we showed you,
it works.
So now we have our NSWindow,
and we just switch.
This is a similar, you know,
kind of a similar
example to send message.
We switch whether it's an open panel,
the calls are slightly different.
We go ahead and we call performSelector
on main thread to show either
an open panel or a saved panel.
[Transcript missing]
Create an NSOpenPanel,
set it to allow multiple selection,
round of applause, native file dialogs
with multiple selection.
Okay, so you're too kind.
And then we go ahead and
we show this as a sheet.
We start at the home directory,
obviously you could customize this.
And now we have this delegate,
which is the self,
and the did end selector.
So this is the callback that's going
to happen in Cocoa when the user either
selects a file or cancels the sheet.
And in this case,
it's open panel did end.
So now, at this point,
when this method is called,
the user has dismissed the
sheet one way or another.
And we check the return code.
We get a valid JNI environment again.
If it was an okay,
meaning something was selected,
we go ahead and enumerate
through the file names.
We create an array.
So this is something that's
a little different that we
didn't talk about before.
You create an array of
objects in JNI using this new
object array method function.
There are also primitive array
functions like new int array,
new long array, so on and so forth.
So we create this array,
and we do our standard string conversion.
We get the characters out,
cast it to a JCAR, and call new string.
And now we make this call
to set object array element.
Working with Java objects across
the JNI is not as easy as just
referencing them using open and
closed brackets like you're used to.
You have to actually set
object array element in here.
So, we do this for every case.
Now you can set,
you can pass in one element in here,
or you can pass in a series of elements.
There's matching functions
for both of those.
And when we're done here,
we go ahead and we delete
the local ref to the string.
This is different from a global ref,
but it's more cleanup work that's
necessary when you're creating objects.
And now we do our callback.
And much like we had the
Cocoa color change callback,
we have the open finish method.
And we're going to
call that back in Java,
and I'll show you up here
what that looked like.
Fire Open Sheet Finish.
So let's see what that
looks like on the Java side.
We're jumping back and forth.
So here is...
[Transcript missing]
"But, just for fun, we'll do it again.
And you can see I've got some stuff here.
So I'll show you what I was
talking about with that diagram.
It may have been a lot to
swallow the first time,
but we'll show you exactly
what we mean in a second."
And as soon as this comes up,
I can show you when I just
do Command-O for open.
And you notice because of the
asynchronous stuff that we've done here,
I can still resize this window despite
the fact that we have gone ahead and
shown a sheet using a Java callback.
If we were doing-- if we were failing
to block-- if we were blocking in our
performSelector on main thread call,
this would give us some problems
because the resize would
not be able to be processed.
We're busy waiting for
this sheet to go away.
And so, I click open,
that asynchronous call on the Cocoa side
for open panel did end gets called,
which goes ahead and checks whether
I cancelled or selected a file,
and then we see down here
user cancelled open save.
So let's see what I was talking
about earlier with these.
I have this handy call
here called deadlock.
And what we're going to do instead of the
good citizen thing of an invoke later,
we're just going to call back
our open sheet finished handler,
which is, again,
going to show that J option
pane with our return value.
So we're just going to do that
from wherever we happen to be
when we get this call back.
And we already know that this call
back occurs on the app kit thread.
So here we are.
We're getting a call back from app kit,
and we're going to try to show an
AWT dialogue from the app kit thread,
a blocking one.
Let's build again.
And I have an error.
What did I do wrong?
One more time.
Luckily, I'm a little ahead of time,
so if we have a problem,
we can just do this again.
Okay.
This side's clean.
We haven't changed anything here.
Now what we're changing is the callback.
Now when I click this Open function,
we get that callback from Cocoa.
And when we talk to Java again,
we're no longer doing the
event queue invoke later.
So we're going to go ahead
and try to show a J option
pane from the AppKit thread.
And yeah,
we're not going to get too far there.
And there's our trusty friend,
the beach ball.
And so the reason this is happening is,
let's go ahead and have a look.
If you were at the develop, debug,
and deploy session this morning,
you would have learned how to do this.
We can get our JSheets process ID, 1170.
And I do a kill-quit 1170.
Is that right?
Was that the right PID?
We'll find out.
And here's our thread dump.
Now let's see what's going on here.
Here's our event queue.
It's doing some kind of
container validation.
That's not something that we did.
That's just something that's normally
going on in the AWT right now.
And here's what I told
you to look out for.
You don't ever want to see your code
sitting on the AWT-AppKit thread,
because what has ended up
happening was here is our
Here's our open sheet
finished callback from Cocoa.
And we've gone ahead and
shown a Joption pane,
which is going to go ahead and
try to get the AWT-TrueLock,
which unfortunately is being
held by the AWT-Queue already.
And because we're busy blocking
the AppKit thread with this,
AWT cannot go ahead down
into the Cocoa world and do
this component validation.
So there's your classic deadlock.
Oops.
All settled by using an invoke later.
So let's see the opposite,
or not the opposite,
but the other way around.
Let's change this back to false.
So here's the Cocoa example.
Now instead of doing a perform
selector on main thread,
we're just going to go ahead and
call the show open panel directly.
And again,
this is in response to an action
performed on that J menu item.
So we're going to go ahead and just
right from our action performed,
right from the AWT thread,
call into AppKit to
try to show this sheet.
And let's see how that goes.
That goes pretty well.
I wonder if I-- make sure
I actually built the bad stuff.
Oh, yeah,
so I was expecting to see a sheet,
and instead I saw a crash.
So you get the general idea of, you know,
whether it be a hang or a crash,
if you don't play by these rules,
you're not going to
get what you expected.
That's practically guaranteed.
And I think we can go
back to the slides now.
Okay, so troubleshooting our deadlocks.
You know,
you saw the kill-dash-quit command.
You saw it this morning in Develop,
Debug, Deploy.
You saw me do it right there.
In order to troubleshoot the native side,
if you end up locking
up your native code,
you need to use GDB.
And there's a couple useful commands,
namely the backtrace.
command, which gives you a dump
of the current thread,
which is, in the case of a deadlock,
possibly the one that you want to see,
see where it is.
And then there is the thread
apply all backtrace command
or T-A-A-B-T in shorthand.
And this will print everything,
all of the native threads.
So that will be able to tell you
maybe where your code is hung up
and where you may have gone wrong.
And even from GDB,
you can get that kill-dask-quit
style right from the same utility.
If you pass in the call void PS,
just like you see it here,
you type that into GDB,
the PS command will give you a
backtrace of the current Java thread,
which may or may not be useful.
In the classic deadlock case,
the Java thread that's hung is
probably the one where you forgot to
do your invoke later or are holding
on to something you shouldn't be.
And then also if you want
to print all of the threads,
you just call PSS,
which gives you all of them.
So some tips.
To store your native pointers, again,
use longs.
And the creatensview kind of hits
the creatensview long function
kind of hits this point home.
But if you're just doing other
things to create native structs or
whatever and you need to pass those
back up to Java for later use,
make sure you store them as Java longs.
Create a cache at class load time
when system load library is called.
It will save you a lot of
time and trouble for when you
need those callbacks later.
And because the JMethodIDs are
valid as long as the class does,
you can safely cache them.
And be careful with your global refs.
Make sure everywhere you
have a clear creation point,
there is a clear deletion point
that you know will be hit.
Otherwise, you're going to start leaking
objects on the Java side.
If you have a component,
you can do this in remove notify.
It's a very reliable and clean
and sensible place to do it.
So doing specific work with Mac OS X,
if you are down in the native side,
you need to get something inside --
from inside your Java application,
your first thought might be to pass this
huge URL string down into -- across the
JNI that you then had to parse using C.
In fact, you can just go ahead and
use the CFBundle APIs.
If you have something that
you know is in contents,
resources, Java,
go ahead and pass in the resources
constant to the appropriate CFBundle API,
and it will get what you need.
And again,
once you start playing these games,
you are a Cocoa programmer,
so you need to remember all the memory
management stuff that goes along,
not just the threading, but the retain,
the release, the auto-release.
The one exception is Cocoa component.
You need to go ahead and retain
that for us as long as we need it.
Threads that you created need to
have an auto-release pool in them.
And you may -- if you look
into the JSheets code,
you'll see that when we go
ahead and create our sheets,
we actually create an auto-release pool
there because we can't necessarily be
guaranteed that there is one in place.
The only exception for that is
create NSView and AWT message
because we know that those are
happening on the AppKit thread.
And another quick tip,
you can use the throw
new function in JNI.
If you're doing
Objective-C exception handling,
you can go ahead and create a
Java exception and throw that back up,
you know,
with whatever message it may contain.
So VM invocation, real quick,
I think I just hit zero.
So it's a very standard call,
JNI create Java VM.
This is pretty standard to
do across multiple platforms.
It's C code,
so it's not compile portable.
But the code should be very similar.
You create a struct of
VM initialization args.
You pass in JNI version
1.4 if you want 1.4.
The key on Mac OS X is to make
sure you not start the virtual
machine on the main thread.
Don't do it from your main method.
So if you're in a CoCoL application,
go ahead and call detached
new thread with selector.
And in this case,
your selector is going to be the method
that actually calls JNI create Java VM.
Now for 1.5, we have an environment
variable that you need to set.
Just do a simple set end.
And you set Java JVM version
to J2SE5 or 1.5.
And our updated samples
code simple Java launcher,
which uses core foundation
to start up a Java VM,
and Java splash stream,
which has a Cocoa example,
both of those have been updated
to do the new 1.5 invocation.
So take a look at those.
And again, I just want to talk a little
bit about the Intel transition,
we did that in front of
you in the first demo.
But start building your
JNI libraries as universal now.
If you go home today and you're
interested in doing this JNI work,
go ahead and start checking those boxes.
I know it's a lot of work.
Check the check boxes,
build the libraries,
and you'll be ready to go
for the foreseeable future.
Something to keep in mind,
if you are writing a native launch
or using JNI Create Java VM,
that will not work in Rosetta.
You need to have a universal binary if
you're building a native application
that's going to start a Java VM.
So if that's something you
are interested in doing,
the message here, and I'm sure it's been
the message everywhere,
is build universal binaries.
And for the most part,
you don't really need to be
too worried about your data.
But there are big endian
versus little endian issues,
depending on the kind of
data that you're passing.
So if you're going to be packing--
you saw when I did my color
notification across the bridge from
the NSColorWell to the J label,
I passed each of those RGBA values
independently as floats.
That's the better thing to do.
The alternative may have been to
go ahead and pack all of those
into a single Jint or Jlong.
And if you're going to go
ahead and start packing things,
then you're going to run into
endian issues when you go
across different architectures.
We'll be talking about this
in more detail in tomorrow's
virtual machine exposed session,
which I don't think is on your calendar
because it was a secret session.
So if you really have
concerns about this stuff,
come to the session tomorrow.
And for more information,
Alan Samuel is our Java evangelist,
and Wiley is our Java product manager.
He's the marketing man.
You can contact either of these
guys for questions or concerns.
And if you're real confused about
all this stuff I was talking about,
then you probably need to
talk to me or my counterpart,
Ted Jouzevic, who you saw this morning.
And you can get a hold of us
by going to DTS@apple.com.
Related sessions.
Well, unfortunately,
these have all happened.
But when you guys have access
to your online content,
you can go ahead and look at these.
There's two of them, actually.
The Java Performance and
Graphics Tuning is tomorrow at 9,
followed by the
VM Performance session at 10:30,
which is actually a lab.
and sample code other resources.
There are a lot of resources that I'd
like to point you to for this session.
Obviously the samples
that came with the talk.
There are other things like
the OS X adapter sample,
which one of the things you'll notice
when you look at these samples,
the ones that are applicable,
like the J Color Chooser and the Sheets,
those are actually detecting
what platform they're on,
and in the case that it's
not on Mac OS X Tiger,
it doesn't even load the
class with the JNI content.
So in other words,
these built applications
will run on Windows,
despite the fact that
they have JNI libraries,
because the libraries won't even
be loaded on the other platforms.
So you can write platform-specific code
without sacrificing your portability,
and these examples will
show you how to do that.
We also have debugging Tech Notes.
We have other porting Tech Notes that
you're gonna want to look at,
and you can see them
linked to this session.